---
name: Do renewables destroy jobs? 
number: "06"
year: 2019
Encadrant: Andréa Michiorri
---
## Do renewables destroy jobs?

(Encadrant : Andréa Michiorri)

**Background**

**Power generation labour content.** Renewable power plants need more
people for their construction, operation and maintenance than
traditional power plants. There are different reasons for this, such as
the lower energy density of renewable energy that requires larger
conversion infrastructures and the lower maturity of the renewable
technologies in respect to thermal power plants. For example \[1\]
compares the labour content of electricity generation by energy source
for fossil and renewable power plants. It shows that renewables have all
a higher employment potential than fossil and nuclear resources with the
notable exception of coal, which has the highest labour content per unit
of energy produced because of mining, and hydro, which has the lowest
content.


**Jobs creation by GWh of electricity produced by technology, activity
and origin (EU/non-EU), from \[1\].**

**Technological revolutions and the job market.** From the legend of the
emperor Tiberius killing an artisan guilty to have invented an
infrangible glass menacing the stability of his reign, to the luddites
destroying steam engines to the recent concerns of job losses caused by
AI enabled automation, the impact of technological evolution on the job
market is known since ancient times. Renewables represent a
technological change as we have seen many in the energy industry and
elsewhere. Since WWII for example almost ubiquitous hydro plants have
been flanked by coal, then oil (now severely reduced), nuclear and
finally gas turbines and combined cycle gas turbines power plants. Wind,
and more recently PV, are simply a more recent page in the story.

**Managing the transition.** It is true that the labour content of
generation technologies could be used to optimise both the energy and
the labour policy of a country. But as energy experts, it is difficult
to advocate for the dismantling of nuclear, gas or hydro plants and
replace them with wind and PV just to create more jobs. Also, the labour
policy of a country must be more comprehensive and shouldn't be tailored
for a specific sector needs. Regarding renewables, it is important to
consider that higher labour content will increase the demand for
education and training. This will allow retraining profiles currently
occupied with conventional resources and form the missing workforce that
will be added to the energy sector.

**What experts say**: ILO, the International Labour Organisation,
suggests in a note \[2\] that "*The positive job creation effect of
renewable energy is a result of longer and more diverse supply chains,
higher labour intensity, and increased net profit margins*". And also
"*Of course, as the demand for energy from renewable sources increases,
it is expected that there will be a decrease in demand for oil, coal,
and gas. However, recent studies show that renewable energy projects can
offset job losses from a decline in extractive industries and can, in
turn, create a net employment gain*". On the same line the OECD, the
Organisation for Economic Development, states in \[3\] that
"*Well-functioning labour markets are important to achieve a smooth
transition and reintegrate workers who lose their jobs*". It also notes
how electricity generation is the sector with the highest responsibility
in CO~2~ emissions but has also a negligible impact on total occupation.
This means that changes in this sector can be easily absorbed by the
general labour market. Finally, a complete and up to date review on the
labour content of renewable technologies can be found in the IRENA
Annual Report \[4\].

**What is asked to the students**

From these considerations and the documents below, the students must:

-   Research the literature on the topic

-   Develop a database of cost and employment creation and retention by
    different power generation technology

-   Create a model able to answer the question "Do renewables destroy
    jobs?". Possibly not only with a simple Yes/No answer, but a more
    articulate analysis of different niches and regions.

## Contact : andrea.michiorri\@mines-paristech.fr

**References**

\[1\] Fragkos, Panagiotis & Paroussos, Leonidas. (2018). Job creation
related to Renewables. 10.13140/RG.2.2.26601.13926.

\[2\] A Klemmer, Green jobs and renewable energy: low carbon, high
employment,

\[3\] Employment Implications of Green Growth: Linking jobs, growth, and
green policies OECD REPORT FOR THE G7 ENVIRONMENT MINISTERS June 2017

\[4\] IRENA, Renewable Energy and Jobs, Annual Review 2019
